docs(tip-1027): StablecoinDEX swap-and-send (#3016)
tempoxyz/tempo: tips/tip-1027.md

---
id: TIP-1027
title: StablecoinDEX Swap-and-Send
description: Adds an optional recipient parameter to StablecoinDEX swap functions, allowing callers to send swap output directly to another address.
authors: Dan Robinson
status: Draft
related: TIP-1015, TIP-1028
protocolVersion: TBD
---

# TIP-1027: StablecoinDEX Swap-and-Send

## Abstract

This TIP adds new swap functions to the StablecoinDEX that accept a `recipient` parameter, allowing the caller to direct swap output to a different address in a single call.

## Motivation

Today, swapping and sending to another address requires two transactions: a swap (output goes to the caller) followed by a transfer to the intended recipient. This costs extra gas, increases latency, and prevents atomic swap-and-pay flows.

> Common use cases:

Author: Trimmed to just Payments and DEX balance deposits.

---
id: TIP-1027
title: StablecoinDEX Swap-and-Send
description: Adds an optional recipient parameter to StablecoinDEX swap functions, allowing callers to send swap output directly to another address.
authors: Dan Robinson
status: Draft
related: TIP-1015, TIP-1028
protocolVersion: TBD
---

# TIP-1027: StablecoinDEX Swap-and-Send

## Abstract

This TIP adds new swap functions to the StablecoinDEX that accept a `recipient` parameter, allowing the caller to direct swap output to a different address in a single call.

## Motivation

> Today, swapping and sending to another address requires two transactions: a swap (output goes to the caller) followed by a transfer to the intended recipient. This costs extra gas, increases latency, and prevents atomic swap-and-pay flows.

Reviewer: 1. Not everyone can use Tempo txes.
2. There's a cost to initialize the temporary balance (250k gas)—if we eventually get refunds for storage that is cleared in the same slot that could help, but it's still worse.
3. The caller may not be authorized to receive the token. I think this is an interesting edge case that adds a nice capability to TIP-1015.

Common use cases:

- **Payments**: Swap token A for token B and pay a merchant in one call
- **DEX balance deposits**: Swap and credit the caller's internal DEX balance for immediate limit order placement, avoiding a round-trip transfer

---

# Specification

## New Functions

> Four new swap functions are added to the `IStablecoinDEX` interface — two base functions and two `WithMemo` variants:

Reviewer 2: +1, we should update this IMO.

> Four new swap functions are added to the `IStablecoinDEX` interface — two base functions and two `WithMemo` variants:

Reviewer: Ah interesting idea, but `WithRecipient` and `WithMemo` sounds like the one with the memo doesn't have a recipient, but it does.

An alternative would just be overloading the function with 1-2 arguments and not changing the name. How do we feel about overloading?

```solidity
/// @notice Swap exact input amount and send output to a specified recipient
/// @param tokenIn Token to sell
/// @param tokenOut Token to receive
/// @param amountIn Amount of tokenIn to sell
/// @param minAmountOut Minimum amount of tokenOut the recipient must receive
/// @param recipient Address to receive the output tokens
/// @return amountOut Actual amount of tokenOut sent to recipient
function swapExactAmountInTo(
    address tokenIn,
    address tokenOut,
    uint128 amountIn,
    uint128 minAmountOut,
    address recipient
) external returns (uint128 amountOut);

/// @notice Swap exact input amount and send output to a specified recipient, with memo
/// @param tokenIn Token to sell
/// @param tokenOut Token to receive
/// @param amountIn Amount of tokenIn to sell
/// @param minAmountOut Minimum amount of tokenOut the recipient must receive
/// @param recipient Address to receive the output tokens

> /// @param memo Arbitrary 32-byte memo attached to the output transfer

Reviewer 3: but it's input transfer if recipient = DEX.

Reviewer: Yep good point, should say that

/// @return amountOut Actual amount of tokenOut sent to recipient
function swapExactAmountInToWithMemo(
    address tokenIn,
    address tokenOut,
    uint128 amountIn,
    uint128 minAmountOut,
    address recipient,
    bytes32 memo
) external returns (uint128 amountOut);

/// @notice Swap for exact output amount and send to a specified recipient
/// @param tokenIn Token to sell
/// @param tokenOut Token to receive
/// @param amountOut Exact amount of tokenOut the recipient must receive
/// @param maxAmountIn Maximum amount of tokenIn to spend
/// @param recipient Address to receive the output tokens
/// @return amountIn Actual amount of tokenIn spent
function swapExactAmountOutTo(
    address tokenIn,
    address tokenOut,
    uint128 amountOut,
    uint128 maxAmountIn,
    address recipient
) external returns (uint128 amountIn);

/// @notice Swap for exact output amount and send to a specified recipient, with memo
/// @param tokenIn Token to sell
/// @param tokenOut Token to receive
/// @param amountOut Exact amount of tokenOut the recipient must receive
/// @param maxAmountIn Maximum amount of tokenIn to spend
/// @param recipient Address to receive the output tokens

> /// @param memo Arbitrary 32-byte memo attached to the output transfer

Reviewer 3: but it's input transfer if recipient = DEX.

Reviewer: Same here

This is different from the existing maker-fill path (where `_fillOrder` credits `balances[maker]` without re-checking policies). In that case, the maker was already policy-checked when they placed the order. Here, the caller is newly acquiring a token position via swap, so we must verify they are authorized to hold it.

TIP-1028 address-level receive policies do not apply to the DEX-credit path, since no TIP-20 transfer occurs. Address-level receive policies govern actual token transfers, not internal DEX balance accounting.

## Output Settlement (External Recipient)

For external recipients, the DEX calls `ITIP20(tokenOut).transfer(recipient, amountOut)` (or `transferWithMemo(recipient, amountOut, memo)` for the `WithMemo` variants) — a normal TIP-20 transfer from the DEX. This is identical to how existing swap functions settle output, just with `recipient` instead of `msg.sender`. All standard TIP-20 checks (TIP-403 token-level policies, TIP-1028 address-level receive policies, pause state, recipient validity) are enforced automatically by the TIP-20 transfer.

## Memo Behavior

### External Recipient

> For `WithMemo` variants with an external recipient, the output settlement emits both a `Transfer` event and a `TransferWithMemo` event on the output token, with `from = StablecoinDEX, to = recipient`. The `TransferWithMemo` event is emitted immediately after the `Transfer` event.

Reviewer 3: won't this be confusing if the recipient expects to see a transfer from the sender but sees from from DEX?

For the non-memo variants, the DEX calls `ITIP20(tokenOut).transfer(recipient, amountOut)` and no `TransferWithMemo` event is emitted.

### DEX-Recipient (Internal Balance Credit)

When `recipient == address(StablecoinDEX)` and a memo is provided (via the `WithMemo` variants), the memo is attached to the **input** transfer instead, since no TIP-20 output transfer occurs on this path.

If the input is pulled (fully or partially) from the caller's external wallet, the external portion emits both a `Transfer` event and a `TransferWithMemo` event (with the `TransferWithMemo` immediately after). If the swap is funded entirely from the caller's internal DEX balance, the DEX emits a zero-value `Transfer` and `TransferWithMemo` event on `tokenIn` (with `from = msg.sender, to = StablecoinDEX, amount = 0`) to preserve the memo.

> For the non-memo `To` variants with DEX-recipient, no `TransferWithMemo` is emitted regardless of funding source.

Reviewer: You're right, let's just have this one revert; the special cases just kinda piled up a bit

authors: Dan Robinson
status: Draft
related: TIP-1015, TIP-1028
protocolVersion: T5
---

# TIP-1027: StablecoinDEX Swap-and-Send

## Abstract

This TIP adds new swap functions to the StablecoinDEX that accept a `recipient` parameter, allowing the caller to direct swap output to a different address in a single call.

## Motivation

Today, swapping and sending to another address requires two transactions: a swap (output goes to the caller) followed by a transfer to the intended recipient. This costs extra gas, increases latency, and prevents atomic swap-and-pay flows.

Common use cases:

- **Payments**: Swap token A for token B and pay a merchant in one call
- **DEX balance deposits**: Swap and credit the caller's internal DEX balance for immediate limit order placement, avoiding a round-trip transfer

---

# Specification

## New Functions

Four new swap functions are added to the `IStablecoinDEX` interface — two base functions and two `WithMemo` variants:

```solidity
/// @notice Swap exact input amount and send output to a specified recipient
/// @param tokenIn Token to sell
/// @param tokenOut Token to receive
/// @param amountIn Amount of tokenIn to sell

> /// @param minAmountOut Minimum amount of tokenOut the recipient must receive

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
/// @param minAmountOut Minimum acceptable output amount; the swap reverts if the resulting tokenOut would be less
```

/// @param recipient Address to receive the output tokens
/// @return amountOut Actual amount of tokenOut sent to recipient
function swapExactAmountInTo(
    address tokenIn,
    address tokenOut,
    uint128 amountIn,
    uint128 minAmountOut,
    address recipient
) external returns (uint128 amountOut);

/// @notice Swap exact input amount and send output to a specified recipient, with memo
/// @param tokenIn Token to sell
/// @param tokenOut Token to receive
/// @param amountIn Amount of tokenIn to sell

> /// @param minAmountOut Minimum amount of tokenOut the recipient must receive

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
/// @param minAmountOut Minimum acceptable output amount; the swap reverts if the resulting tokenOut would be less
```

/// @param tokenIn Token to sell
/// @param tokenOut Token to receive
/// @param amountOut Exact amount of tokenOut the recipient must receive
/// @param maxAmountIn Maximum amount of tokenIn to spend
/// @param recipient Address to receive the output tokens
/// @return amountIn Actual amount of tokenIn spent
function swapExactAmountOutTo(
    address tokenIn,
    address tokenOut,
    uint128 amountOut,
    uint128 maxAmountIn,
    address recipient
) external returns (uint128 amountIn);

/// @notice Swap for exact output amount and send to a specified recipient, with memo
/// @param tokenIn Token to sell
/// @param tokenOut Token to receive
/// @param amountOut Exact amount of tokenOut the recipient must receive
/// @param maxAmountIn Maximum amount of tokenIn to spend
/// @param recipient Address to receive the output tokens
/// @param memo Arbitrary 32-byte memo attached to the output transfer
/// @return amountIn Actual amount of tokenIn spent
function swapExactAmountOutToWithMemo(
    address tokenIn,
    address tokenOut,
    uint128 amountOut,
    uint128 maxAmountIn,
    address recipient,
    bytes32 memo
) external returns (uint128 amountIn);
```

> The existing `swapExactAmountIn` and `swapExactAmountOut` functions are unchanged.

Reviewer 4: duplicated in https://github.com/tempoxyz/tempo/pull/3016/changes#diff-94b11f7085b7b8623a2fd53a1b70b42339e32ea064d5a0e650ddd6c72b893de0R178 better keep the latter (maybe extracted to separate compatibility section) which placement makes more sense than here and explains no-delegation. 
```suggestion
```

## Memo Behavior

### External Recipient

For `WithMemo` variants with an external recipient, the output settlement emits both a `Transfer` event and a `TransferWithMemo` event on the output token, with `from = StablecoinDEX, to = recipient`. The `TransferWithMemo` event is emitted immediately after the `Transfer` event.

For the non-memo variants, the DEX calls `ITIP20(tokenOut).transfer(recipient, amountOut)` and no `TransferWithMemo` event is emitted.

### DEX-Recipient (Internal Balance Credit)

When `recipient == address(StablecoinDEX)` and a memo is provided (via the `WithMemo` variants), the memo is attached to the **input** transfer instead, since no TIP-20 output transfer occurs on this path.

> If the input is pulled (fully or partially) from the caller's external wallet, the external portion emits both a `Transfer` event and a `TransferWithMemo` event (with the `TransferWithMemo` immediately after). If the swap is funded entirely from the caller's internal DEX balance, the DEX emits a zero-value `Transfer` and `TransferWithMemo` event on `tokenIn` (with `from = msg.sender, to = StablecoinDEX, amount = 0`) to preserve the memo.

Reviewer 4: when the swap is funded entirely from internal DEX balance, who actually emits the zero-value `Transfer` / `TransferWithMemo` "on tokenIn"? events are scoped to the emitting contract, so the DEX can't just log them on the token's address, either:

- the DEX calls `tokenIn.transferWithMemo(self, 0, memo)` (which means TIP-20 has to allow zero-value memo transfers
- something else I'm missing

same question applies to invariant 7 and test case 12.

For the non-memo `To` variants with DEX-recipient, no `TransferWithMemo` is emitted regardless of funding source.

## Event Emission

The `OrderFilled` event's `taker` field remains `msg.sender` — the taker is the party that initiated the trade, not the recipient of the output. The TIP-20 `Transfer` event shows `from = StablecoinDEX, to = recipient`, which accurately reflects the on-chain token movement.

## Errors

No new errors are added. Invalid recipients (`address(0)` or TIP-20 token addresses) revert with the existing TIP-20 `InvalidRecipient()` error.

## Atomicity

If output settlement fails for any reason (policy denial, paused token, invalid recipient, etc.), the entire swap MUST revert — including all prior order fills, orderbook mutations, and balance changes.

## Implementation Outline

All four new functions MUST execute the same routing, pricing, fill, and input-debit logic as the corresponding existing swap function. The only semantic differences are the output settlement target and memo handling:

> - If `recipient == address(StablecoinDEX)`: check policies, credit `balances[msg.sender][tokenOut]`. For `WithMemo` variants, if the input is pulled from the caller's external wallet (fully or partially), use `transferFromWithMemo` for the external portion so the memo is attached to the input leg. If the swap is funded entirely from internal DEX balance, emit a zero-value `Transfer` and `TransferWithMemo` on `tokenIn` to preserve the memo.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- If `recipient == address(StablecoinDEX)`: follow the [Special Case](#special-case-recipient--addressstablecoindex) above (policy checks and internal balance credit) and the [DEX-Recipient (Internal Balance Credit)](#dex-recipient-internal-balance-credit) section under Memo Behavior for memo handling.
```

- Otherwise: settle via `ITIP20(tokenOut).transfer(recipient, amountOut)` for base variants, or `ITIP20(tokenOut).transferWithMemo(recipient, amountOut, memo)` for `WithMemo` variants.

> The existing `swapExactAmountIn` and `swapExactAmountOut` remain unchanged — they are not refactored to delegate to the new functions, preserving identical behavior for existing callers.

Reviewer 4: maybe worth moving this to a separate `## Backward Compatibility` section

6. **Taker identity**: The `OrderFilled` event's `taker` field MUST be `msg.sender` regardless of the `recipient` parameter.

7. **Memo presence**: The `WithMemo` variants MUST always emit a `TransferWithMemo` event. When `recipient == address(StablecoinDEX)` and the swap is funded entirely from internal DEX balance, a zero-value `Transfer` and `TransferWithMemo` on `tokenIn` MUST be emitted to preserve the memo. The non-memo variants MUST NOT emit a `TransferWithMemo` event. `bytes32(0)` is a valid memo.

8. **Memo placement — external recipient**: For `WithMemo` variants with an external recipient, the memo MUST be attached to the output settlement (the `transferWithMemo` call on `tokenOut`).

9. **Memo placement — DEX-recipient**: For `WithMemo` variants where `recipient == address(StablecoinDEX)`, the memo MUST be attached to the input transfer (the `tokenIn` transfer from caller to DEX), since no TIP-20 output transfer occurs.

## Test Cases

### Core Swap-and-Send

1. **Basic swap-and-send**: `swapExactAmountInTo` sends output to a third-party address. Verify recipient receives the tokens and caller's balance decreases by `amountIn`.

> 2. **Swap-and-send exact out**: `swapExactAmountOutTo` sends exact output to recipient. Verify `amountIn <= maxAmountIn`.

Reviewer 4: those could be merged

3. **Self-recipient**: `swapExactAmountInTo(..., msg.sender)` behaves identically to `swapExactAmountIn(...)`.

4. **DEX-recipient credits balance**: `swapExactAmountInTo(..., DEX_ADDRESS)` credits `balances[msg.sender][tokenOut]` and emits no TIP-20 `Transfer` event for the output.

5. **Invalid recipient reverts early**: All four new functions revert with `InvalidRecipient()` when `recipient == address(0)` or a TIP-20 token address, **before** any order fills or state mutation.

6. **Multi-hop swap-and-send**: A swap that routes through an intermediate pair delivers the final output to the recipient.

7. **Existing functions unchanged**: `swapExactAmountIn` and `swapExactAmountOut` continue to work identically (gas, events, policy checks) before and after this TIP.

### Memo

> 8. **Memo on external recipient**: `swapExactAmountInToWithMemo` emits a `TransferWithMemo` event on `tokenOut` with the provided memo, `from = StablecoinDEX, to = recipient`. The `TransferWithMemo` event MUST be emitted immediately after the corresponding `Transfer` event.

Reviewer 4: could be merged with 14

9. **Memo with bytes32(0)**: `swapExactAmountInToWithMemo(..., bytes32(0))` emits a `TransferWithMemo` event with `memo = bytes32(0)` immediately after the `Transfer` event. This is a valid memo, not "no memo".

10. **No memo on non-memo variants**: `swapExactAmountInTo` and `swapExactAmountOutTo` do NOT emit a `TransferWithMemo` event.

> 11. **Memo on DEX-recipient (external funding)**: `swapExactAmountInToWithMemo(..., DEX_ADDRESS, memo)` where input is pulled from the caller's external wallet attaches the memo to the input transfer. The `TransferWithMemo` event MUST be emitted immediately after the corresponding input `Transfer` event.

Reviewer 4: could be merged with 15

12. **Memo on DEX-recipient (full internal funding)**: `swapExactAmountInToWithMemo(..., DEX_ADDRESS, memo)` where the caller's internal DEX balance fully covers the input emits a zero-value `Transfer` and `TransferWithMemo` on `tokenIn` (`from = msg.sender, to = StablecoinDEX, amount = 0`) to preserve the memo.

13. **No memo on DEX-recipient non-memo variant**: `swapExactAmountInTo(..., DEX_ADDRESS)` does not emit any `TransferWithMemo` event regardless of funding source.

14. **Exact-out memo on external recipient**: `swapExactAmountOutToWithMemo` emits a `TransferWithMemo` event on `tokenOut` immediately after the `Transfer` event.

15. **Exact-out memo on DEX-recipient**: `swapExactAmountOutToWithMemo(..., DEX_ADDRESS, memo)` follows the same memo rules as the exact-in variant (memo on input transfer if external funding occurs, no memo if fully internal-funded).

### Policy (TIP-403 / TIP-1015)

16. **Policy: blocked recipient**: If `recipient` is blocked by `tokenOut`'s recipient policy, the swap-and-send reverts.

> 17. **DEX frozen as sender**: If `tokenOut`'s policy blacklists the DEX as a sender, both `swapExactAmountInTo` (external recipient) and `swapExactAmountInTo` (DEX-balance credit) revert.

Reviewer 4: let's make clear when `swapExactAmountInTo` is called with `DEAX_ADDRESS` as recipient like in other tests
```suggestion
+17. **DEX frozen as sender**: If `tokenOut`'s policy blacklists the DEX as a sender, both `swapExactAmountInTo(..., recipient)` (external recipient) and `swapExactAmountInTo(..., DEX_ADDRESS)` (DEX-balance credit) revert.
```

18. **DEX-recipient + blocked caller**: `swapExactAmountInTo(..., DEX_ADDRESS)` reverts if `msg.sender` is blocked by `tokenOut`'s recipient policy.

19. **Paused token reverts (external recipient)**: If `tokenOut` is paused, `swapExactAmountInTo` to an external recipient reverts during settlement (enforced by TIP-20 `transfer`).

> 20. **Paused token reverts (DEX-recipient)**: If `tokenOut` is paused, `swapExactAmountInTo(..., DEX_ADDRESS)` reverts. The pause check is enforced by the DEX before crediting internal balance.

Reviewer 4: same, could be merged

### Address-Level Policies (TIP-1028)

21. **Recipient address-level receive policy**: If `recipient` has a whitelist receive policy that does not include the DEX address, the swap-and-send reverts (enforced by TIP-20 `transfer`).

> 22. **Recipient token set**: If `recipient` has a token set that does not include `tokenOut`, the swap-and-send reverts.

Reviewer 5: Is this purposeful or the use of the `ESCROW_ADDRESS` in https://github.com/tempoxyz/tempo/pull/3791 was added later and the tokens should be redirected there?
